Hi everybody we are back with a bonus
round of some JavaScript first steps or
perhaps these are even indications for
the next steps that we wanna take
into our JavaScript journey.
So, so far in the course we have
built few different projects,
we've been working with JavaScript,
we've been looking at all of its different
ways of interacting with the webpage.
We've been talking about
different types of syntax and
different types of values and
how different parts of the language work.
But of course as you go out and,
venture into the wilderness of the web,
we will be running into some other
considerations around JavaScript
that we haven't really had too
much time to talk about yet.
So that's what I'd like to do now with
you all is talk about some things
we're gonna run into when we
encounter JavaScript in the wild, or
as Morpheus says in the real world.
So there is, of course, a ton more we
could say about JavaScript than we have
been able to say in this course.
And for that you have so many other
awesome courses on FrontEnd Masters and
all of the documentation on MDN and the
whole rest of the web community to help
you get your feet wet with all kinds of,
other things about JavaScript.
But there were a few concepts that I did
wanna just mention so that we can talk
about a little bit here today, and that's
because they are gonna be relevant to
how you're gonna be using JavaScript
in real life as a web developer.
One cause have we discovered a little
bit of a hint act earlier when we're
working on our doggo fetch project,
is the concept of modules.
So let's take a minute and talk about it.
So modules are a relatively
new development in
JavaScript that essentially
let us take a big,
big long program and
split it up across multiple files.
So we have maybe started to
get to the point in our doggo
fetch project where we have
a lot of things going on.
We have a lot of different functionality,
the code file is starting
to get pretty long.
And the more and more complex your
JavaScript projects become and
as we said JavaScript started out being
a language intended to just write a few
lines of scripting code to add a little
bit of interactivity to a simple web page.
And now, decades later, we have hugely
complex JavaScript project being
written with huge teams split up
into different places in the world.
And we all have to kind of work together
on these really massive JavaScript
projects.
So modules lets us take a big, big,
big JavaScript codebase like that and
split it up into multiple files so that it
becomes a little bit easier to work with.
So there are some differences
between module style JavaScript and
the regular JavaScript that we had
sort of been looking at initially and
one of those differences is await.
So do you remember how when we tried to
run await at one point earlier, we ran
into an error message that JavaScript
said wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, you
can't just run await in any function, you
have to run await in an async function.
So similarly to that,
JavaScript also complains if we try to use
await outside of a function,
that's usually not possible.
And so in our doggo quiz, we actually
have an await here that
is outside of a function.
It is just hanging out
outside of any function,
it is what's called at the top level
of this program in this script.
And usually,
this would be a problem for JavaScript.
So, if we take a closer look
at our .doggo fetch file,
we actually find that in our script tag,
we're not just working
with a regular script tag or
<script type="text/javascript">,
we have <script type=''module''>.
If we check this out here.
We scroll up, we can double check for
ourselves in our code, there it is.
So in our script tag, we had this special
designation that this is a module script.
Now if we didn't have that.
Usually, we would have just
kind of a script tag or
maybe you've seen also script equals, and
then the string text slash JavaScript.
So, if we try that,
if we take out our module designation,
and we go back to our
local JavaScript file,
we see this syntax error,
await is only valid in async functions.
We ran into that earlier,
async generators and modules.
So unless I designate and tell JavaScript
with that type equals module here,
that this is not just a regular Java
script, but a JavaScript module.
Unless I do that,
JavaScript is not going to allow me
to await my loadQuizData function.
So if I put that back in here now that
I make it a module again and save and
reload, well,
something else is going wrong, but
we'll talk about that in a moment.
Okay, so one of the differences
between modules and regular JavaScript
scripts is await, top level of await,
but another difference is scope.
So we said that there's a few
different cases in JavaScript where we
create a new scope.
For example, functions were
one of those that we ran into.
And another time that JavaScript
will create a new scope for
us is when we have a module.
So, earlier we tried to access the BREEDS
constant variable that we had assigned to
this long list of dog breeds,
in our earlier
programs like the quiz.js for example.
We had some things like option buttons,
right?
Which when we went and we loaded our
local JavaScript quiz program here,
I could still access
option buttons which was
a variable that we had
declared in this script.
But notice,
that's because this is not a module,
this is just a regular JavaScript script.
And so
I'm able to see into this script, and
all of those variables that I declare
here, they are not in a different scope,
they are still accessible to
me in my global scope here.
But in doggo fetch,
since we have this module,
I'm not able to access any of these
variables that I declare in here,
they are local to the scope of the module.
So again it's kind of like that module is
like this limo with tinted windows that
Bart Simpson can't see into.
So one of the other differences,
other than top level await between
modules and scripts is scope.
Now, I said earlier that the whole
reason modules exist is so
that we can split our code
up into multiple files.
But if we can't see into
the scope of a module,
how can we use code from
another file in our file?
And that is where import and
export statements come in.
So you might run into these as you're
reading other people's JavaScript code
around the web,
because these are becoming more and
more useful that folks are splitting
up code into different modules.
And so
you'll see things like export statements.
So export from a module is sort
of like exposing a variable or
a value, whatever it may be.
It may be a constant value, might be
a function that you want people to be able
to use, might be data,
it might be all kinds of stuff.
So export what it does is it says,
hey, from this module,
I wanna pop some values up
the roof of the limo here so
that other people can see
them if they need to.
And once we have a module
with some code where we've
exported something,
we can in another module,
import something that
the first module has exported.
So that's how we can sort of
take advantage of code that
is written in some other module.
And we use our curly braces this looks
very much like the kind of destructuring
syntax that we saw before.
Because when we export something,
we're going to name certain value,
certain variables essentially.
Essentially what we're doing is creating
an object of exports that has some
properties on it.
In this case, it has a property
veryUsefulFunction that points at
a function that doesn't do a ton,
but is there.
And when we import, we sort of do
a kind of destructuring on that, and
we say which variables, which properties,
or which exported things
from the other module we would like to
pull in to this module that I meant.
So what we end up with,
is a way to kind of talk between modules
via this import and
export statement, sort of opening up
the sunroof of our tinted windows limo and
our scope here.
So we allow certain values to be exposed
but certain values but certain other
values might still be local to the module
scope if they're not exported.
So I've got here on our on our course,
materials page, so
this is again
anjana.dev/javascript-first-steps.
You'll notice a new option in our
Doggo Fetch here, a modular version.
So let's take a look at this.
Even in our local Doggo Fetch that we
were working in, we had one big module.
That's how we were able
to use top level await.
But in this version,
if I inspect what's going on here,
I'll notice that now in this version,
I have two script tags.
Let's take a look at the codes.
So I'm going to save this as modular,
and go over to my editor and open it up.
So we can take a better look here.
Okay, so this is the same program,
it's doing the same thing,
I still have my functionality
that I had before.
But if we scroll down we notice that
there's something a little bit different.
So now I have two script
tags in my file here.
And one is the same that we had before,
but this time I don't
have any of my kind of little
helper functions there that
were pulling in random elements from
an array or shuffling an array.
They're no longer in the module that's
written in my DoggoFetch.html file,
what I'm doing is I'm
actually importing them.
What I'm doing is actually
importing them from another module.
In this case, it's called 3-utilities.js.
And I'm getting that involved here via
this other script tag that's saying, hey,
there's another module that I
care about for this program.
So that is loading,
another file that you can find here,
this utilities file, on the course
materials page, which if we look at that,
this is just a JavaScript file,
it ends in .js instead of .html.
And this has essentially the functions
that we wrote earlier, that we had
the helper function, some of them were
already written in a JavaScript file.
And what we're doing is exporting
the things that we want
people to be able to use from
this other utilities file,
just because we don't want them to have
to be cluttering up our main program.
These are utilities,
they're not super important,
we just wanna be able to
use their functionality.
We don't want to have so
much code in our one module.
So what we're doing is we're
exporting three of these functions,
getRandomElement, shuffleArray and
getMultipleChoices from
this utilities module.
And then in my main Duggo Fetch module,
I am importing those using
that destructuring kind of syntax and
this special import statement.
And so
now I'm able to call those functions like
getRandomElement for example.
Or shuffleArray or
getMultipleChoices I'm able to call those
functions from within my module so
the whole thing still works.
So this is how you might see code
split up in different places.
So now there's a few more things
we could say about modules, for
example, the reason that I'm showing you
these files hosted on anjana.dev here,
is that if we were to try to do this in
a local file, the browser won't allow it.
And this is because of some
browser security policies
around how one file of code is able to
load in information from another file.
So if I were to try to do
this in my local file,
in my DoggoFetch.html that I'm
just opening at a file URL
in my browser,
loading another module wouldn't work.
It only works, if we're hosting them both
from the same place on the interwebs,
let's say.
So this is another difference
between modules and scripts.
And there are a lot of other things that
we could say about modules, and of course,
MDN has a whole bunch more
information about them.
So if you want to dig in, you can
read a bit more about how they work.
About some of the restrictions or
some of the differences between a regular
JavaScript script and a JavaScript module.
So the suffice it to say
that modules are kind of
part of the the modern professional
web developer workflow.
Because our programs are now so
complex that it would be completely
impractical to have them all in one file.
So you will see these import and
export statements more and
more around the JavaScript
that you're reading and
starting to work with as you get into
a professional level of JavaScript.
And there's a lot more that we could
say about that modules in JavaScript
as a whole.
Could be a whole course in, and of itself
and so, there are some other courses on
Frontend masters that go into this in
more detail that you can go ahead and
explore next.